# HopStart In Packet Header Flags

- Start Date: 2024-02-21
- RFC PR: [Meshtastic/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/Meshtastic/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Affected Components: Firmware, Packet contents

## Summary

[One paragraph explanation of the feature or change and its impact across the
Meshtastic ecosystem.]

The originator of a packet places a copy of the original `HopLimit` in the
unused bits of the Packet Header Flags. This new field will be called the
`HopStart`.
(see: https://meshtastic.org/docs/overview/mesh-algo/ for `PacketHeaderFlags`)
This allows **all** receivers of the packet to deduce the number of hops the packet has made
traveling from the originator. The hop count is deduced by subtracting `HopLimit` from `HopStart`.

### Packet Header Flags 

| Index |	# of Bits	| Usage        |
|-------|-----------|--------------|
|0      |3          |	`HopLimit`   |
|3	    |1	        | `WantAck`    |
|4	    |1	        | `ViaMQTT`    |
|5 .. 7 |3	        | **HopStart** |

## Motivation

[Why are we doing this? What problem does it solve or what use cases does it
support? Discuss the benefits for the different components of the Meshtastic
ecosystem, including end-users, developers, and core maintainers.]

Knowing the hop count every node on the mesh provides a wealth of additional information that could be
further developed into features. Motivations include.
* Knowing a packet is from a direct neighbors
* Knowing how many hops away a node is.
* Making better and targeted decisions about repeating a packet on the network.
* Choosing a better `HopLimit` to use to reply to a message. Use friendlier
  lower counts for local replies and increasing the count for more distant
  replies.
* Knowing a packet has been repeated and no longer incorrectly attributing the receive characteristics to the originator.

## Ecosystem Impact

[Explain how this change will affect the various components of the Meshtastic
ecosystem, including firmware, phone, desktop, and web applications. Address
any coordination required among these components.]

* The change itself is to existing packets and will generate no
  extra traffic on the net.
* More information about the topology of the network is know to every one
  without any extra traffic.
* Algorithms can use the hop count to improve the performance of the network.
* Unlocks further development where applications could potentially display
  addition topology information about the mesh. Highlighting nearest neighbors
  or displaying the hop count to all known nodes.
* Application can now distinguish between direct and indirect packets and
  therefore can attribute signal strength to only direct packets. This is not
  possible at the moment and a signal strength is incorrectly attributed to the
  sender, even if the received packet is from a node who repeated it.

## Protocol Buffer Changes

[Detail the changes proposed to Meshtastic's protocol buffer definitions, if
any. Explain how these changes will be managed and propagated across the
different applications and firmware.]

Addition of a `HopStart` field to packet's `Packet Header Flags`. This can be
added to firmware. Derived features can be rolled out to applications once the
firmware change is made.

## Technical Details

[Provide a more in-depth technical explanation of the proposed changes,
focusing on the high-level architecture and how different components of the
ecosystem will interact with these changes. This section should explain your
proposed solution in enough detail that someone familiar with the Meshtastic
ecosystem can understand the design and implementation of the feature.]

Originator places the `HopLimit` in the `HopLimit` field, but also in the
`HopStart` field. Repeaters preserve the packet contents apart from decrementing the
`HopLimit`. It is highly likely that current firmware already does this.

### Compatibility Considerations

[Discuss how the proposed changes will affect backward compatibility across the
ecosystem. Include strategies for handling compatibility issues. Discuss whether
this change requires any version bumps.]

Existing firmware will populate this field with zero. A receiver will see zero
as either a legacy packet or a packet that has been sent with a zero HopLimit.
The inability to distinguish between these two scenarios is a limitation but
often such packets have a special meaning and are therefor already know to be
zero hop packets.
Repeaters should repeat the packet as is whether they have this feature or are
legacy.

### Security Considerations

[Address any security implications of the proposed changes, especially those
that might arise from modifications in protocol buffers and cross-component
communication.]

None that I can think of.

### Performance Considerations

[Evaluate how the change will impact the performance of various components in
the ecosystem, including the efficiency and responsiveness of Meshtastic devices
and applications.]

**Zero** impact on mesh performance or utilization.

## Drawbacks

[Discuss the potential downsides or limitations of the proposal. Why might this
change be controversial or challenging to implement?]

No real drawbacks. Obtaining the benefits of this change requires further
development. This solution cannot distinguish between a legacy packet or one that
was sent with a zero `HopLimit`

## Rationale and Alternatives

- Zero impact.
- Very useful addition information about all packets on the mesh available to
  all receivers.
- 'Trace route' provides detail about intermediate nodes but requires extra mesh
  traffic and is very unreliable. It requires the data to complete a round trip
  to be of any value. Trace route is not zero impact.

## Prior Art

[Discuss any similar implementations in other projects or technologies and what
can be learned from them. Include both successful and unsuccessful examples.]

* Feature request: https://github.com/meshtastic/firmware/issues/3239
* Partially implemented branch: https://github.com/GUVWAF/Meshtastic-device/tree/hopStart
  
## Unresolved Questions

- Unsure the impact of adding the field to the `PacketHeaderFlags`, even if that
  field is unused.
  Is the API robust enough for current receiving application to work without
  modification, even when ignoring the addition field.
  Would a legacy application work with firmware updated with this feature?
- Is it true the current version of the hardware repeats the 
  `PacketHeaderFlags` on the network intact, even without an
  update? It is not so bad if legacy repeaters repeated the header with this
  field zeroed, but it would be nice if they did not do this.
